[PKO-351] Added documentation for `HostedClusterPackage` API (#27)
package-operator/website: content/en/docs/advanced_features/hostedclusterpackage-api.md

---
title: HostedClusterPackage API

> weight: 1200

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight: 1201
```

images: []
mermaid: true
---

**Note**: The `HostedClusterPackage` API is experimental and subject to
change in future.

The `HostedClusterPackage` API extends Package Operator with progressive
rollout capabilities for Packages targeting HyperShift Hosted Control Planes

> (HCP). It introduces a cluster-scoped custom resource, the Package, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(HCP). It introduces a cluster-scoped custom resource, the `HostedClusterPackage`, which
```

Reviewer: And generally: I recommend wrapping object type names, like HostedClusterPackage, HostedClusters, Packages etc in backticks.

Example:

I recommend wrapping object type names, like `HostedClusterPackage`, `HostedClusters`, `Packages` etc in backticks.

governs the lifecycle and update process of Packages across all hosted control
planes within a HyperShift Management Cluster.

## Overview

> This API allows for the gradual rollout of updates to HostedClusters,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This API allows for the central rollout of Packages to all hosted control planes on a given management cluster.
It provides facilities to controll rollout strategies,
```

significantly reducing the "blast radius" of failed upgrades compared to
simultaneous updates. It also simplifies the configuration required to deliver
objects into an HCP namespace by reducing the dependency on multiple systems

> (Hive, ACM) down to a single API.

Reviewer: Usages of hive and ACM are internal implementation details - can you please generalize them away?

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  subgraph Hive
    metrics-sss["metrics-forwarder<br><b>SelectorSyncSet</b>"]
  end
  subgraph HyperShift Management Cluster
    metrics-hsp["metrics-forwarder<br><b>HyperShift Package</b>"]
    subgraph Namespace: my-cluster-x
      ns-c1["<b>Package</b>"]
    end
    subgraph Namespace: my-cluster-y
      ns-c2["<b>Package</b>"]
    end
  end
  metrics-sss--->metrics-hsp
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c1
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c2

> ```

Reviewer: Please remove Hive and the SelectorSyncSet from this diagram, too.

My proposal:

```mermaid
flowchart
  subgraph "HyperShift Management Cluster (MC)"
    metrics-hsp["<b>HyperShift Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
    subgraph "HC Namespace: my-cluster-x"
      ns-c1["<b>Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
    end
    subgraph "HC Namespace: my-cluster-y"
      ns-c2["<b>Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
    end
  end
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c1
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c2
```

Author: How about adding an image instead of flowchart? I have created this in excalidraw. Let me know your thoughts.
<img width="957" height="635" alt="hostedclusterpackage-api" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b422669b-3526-4f37-9add-3ada2763bead" />

Reviewer: Why? Because the padding/margin of the HC Namespace boxes are broken?
I recommend sticking to mermaid diagrams because the rest of the website uses them too.
Maybe some CSS can be added to fix the boxes instead.

Author: Cool.

### Key Features

* **Progressive Rollout**: Updates are rolled out gradually to HostedClusters
  rather than all at once.
* **Lifecycle Automation**: Automatically creates Packages for new
  HostedClusters and deletes them when the cluster is removed.

> * **Status & Monitoring**: Provides metrics and status updates on the number

Reviewer: Usage of the word `metrics` implies prometheus style metrics, which is not want we expose here.

  of available, unavailable, or updated packages.
* **Simplified Configuration**: Reduces the configuration surface from

>   multiple objects (SelectorSyncSet, Policy, PlacementRule, etc.) to just the

Reviewer: No direct hive/acm mentions here as well.
You can talk about not having to use an external synchronization mechanism to create Package objects in hosted cluster namespaces, though.

  `HostedClusterPackage` API.

## HostedClusterPackage Resource

> The `HostedClusterPackage` resource is the core configuration object for this API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The newly introduced `HostedClusterPackage` resource configuration object for this functionality.
```

It coordinates the rollout process and defines how updates traverse the fleet

> of HostedClusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It coordinates the rollout process and which HostedClusters in the
fleet are targeted.
```

### Targeting Clusters

The API includes an optional label selector to target specific HostedClusters

> within the Management cluster.

Reviewer: Needs example.

### Partitioning

To control the order of updates, you can attach an optional partition configuration
to the Package API. This ensures that all items within a specific group are processed
before the rollout moves to the next group.

* **Grouping**: The configuration uses labels on the HostedCluster object to
  assign groups (e.g., hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group).
* **Ordering**: Groups can be ordered via a static list or by alphanumeric
  ascending order.
* **Implicit Handling**: HostedClusters without the specified label or with
  unknown values are placed in an implicit "unknown" group and upgraded last.
* **Dynamic Regrouping**: If a cluster's label changes to an earlier group
  during an upgrade, the process will jump back to handle that group before
  continuing.

```yaml
spec:
  partition:
    labelKey: hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group
    order:
      static:
        - early
        - normal
        - late

> ```

Reviewer: Good example! Needs another example for alphanumeric ordering first because this strategy is simpler to manager AND more powerful so we'll want to teach that one first.

Author: I am not sure / don't know how we can use alphanumeric ordering here. Can you please share some examples?

Reviewer: You could set `alphanumericAsc: {}` and then talk about example label values for the specified `labelKey` on HostedCluster objects and how they will be sorted alphanumerically.

Maybe including a diagram that groups and orders some clusters?

Author: I have added the example. However, as discussed yesterday, I think explaining this how setting `alphanumericAsc: {}` will be out of the scope.

### Progression Strategies

The API supports configurable progression strategies to control the speed and safety
of the rollout.

### Rolling Upgrade

The `rollingUpgrade` strategy is designed to keep service disruptions to a minimum.

* `maxUnavailable`: Configures the maximum number of Package instances that
  can be updating or unavailable at the same time. If a Package is already
  unavailable before the upgrade starts, it counts towards this limit. These
  unavailable packages are prioritized for updates to prevent accumulating
  faulty versions.

> * `minReadySeconds`: Specifies the minimum time to wait before considering a

Reviewer: This was not implemented, was it?

Reviewer: Take a look at the current state of https://github.com/package-operator/package-operator/pull/2316 to see the implementation. It also contains a regenerated api-reference.md

  package ready (e.g., 60 seconds).

```yaml
spec:
  strategy:
    rollingUpgrade:
      maxUnavailable: 1
```

> ## Status & Observability

Reviewer: I think this section should nclude an example status from a pko installation of the current feature PR.

> The Package API exposes status information to help you track the progress of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`HostedClusterPackage` objects expose status information to help you track the progress of a
```

> rollout and the health of the fleet. This status is critical for understanding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rollout and the health of the fleet. This status is can help understand
```

if an update is proceeding smoothly or if it has stalled due to errors.

### Rollout State

The status subresource provides high-level metrics regarding the rollout
process. These fields allow you to quickly assess the distribution of package
versions across your HostedClusters:

* **Updated Packages**: The number of HostedClusters that have successfully
  received the latest version of the Package.

* **Available Packages**: The number of HostedClusters where the Package is

>   currently healthy and serving traffic.

Reviewer: Based on `Available` status condition of the Package

* **Unavailable Packages**: The number of HostedClusters where the Package is

>   currently degraded or updating. This count is used to enforce the

Reviewer: Packages are only considered unavailable when they don't expose an `Available=True` status condition. AFAIK this metric does not count not-yet-upgraded packages.

Author: Yes. However, if we want, we can use `Available != True` as a metric to count how many unavailable packages are there. Maybe sometime in future, it can be used to build some metrics around PKO. IDK. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yes we definitely can do that in the future. :)

The count here does not reflect packages which are still updating though so I think `or updating` should be removed.

  maxUnavailable limit defined in the progression strategy.

### Progression Logic

> The operator uses the status of individual Packages to determine if the rollout can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The controller uses the status of individual Packages to determine if the rollout can
```

proceed to the next target.

* **Success**: If a targeted HostedCluster successfully updates and becomes
  available, the operator proceeds to select the next cluster in the partition.

* **Failure**: If a Package update fails or becomes unavailable, the rollout

>   pauses for that specific rollout path. This prevents the propagation of errors

Reviewer: What is a rollout path?

Author: rollout path = target hosted cluster 🙂

Reviewer: I'd say lets write that instead then

  to the rest of the fleet.

## Monitoring

In addition to the resource status, the controller exports metrics that
provide a fleet-wide overview of the rollout state. SREs can utilize these
metrics to build dashboards that visualize the number of available versus

> unavailable packages over time.

Reviewer: AFAIK this is not true.

Author: I will remove this.

## Configuration Example

The following YAML example demonstrates a HostedClusterPackage configured with
risk-based partitioning and a rolling upgrade strategy.

> ```yaml

Reviewer: This example is completely missing `.spec.template`

apiVersion: package-operator.run/v1alpha1
kind: HostedClusterPackage
metadata:
  name: example-hosted-cluster-package
spec:
  # Partition Configuration
  partition:
    labelKey: hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group
    order:
      # Static ordering example:
      static:
        - early
        - normal
        - late
      # OR Alphanumeric ordering (mutually exclusive with static):

>       # alphanumericAsc: {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      alphanumericAsc: {}
```

  # Progression Strategy

>   minReadySeconds: 60

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: HostedClusterPackage API
weight: 1201
images: []
mermaid: true
---

**Note**: The `HostedClusterPackage` API is experimental and subject to
change in the future.

The `HostedClusterPackage` API extends Package Operator with progressive
rollout capabilities for Packages targeting HyperShift Hosted Control Planes
(HCP). It introduces a cluster-scoped custom resource, the
`HostedClusterPackage`, which governs the lifecycle and update process of
Packages across all hosted control planes within a HyperShift Management
Cluster.

## Overview

This API allows for the central rollout of `Packages` to all hosted control
planes on a given management cluster. It provides facilities to control
rollout strategies, significantly reducing the "blast radius" of failed
upgrades compared to simultaneous updates. It also simplifies the
configuration required to deliver objects into an HCP namespace by reducing
the dependency on multiple systems down to a single API.

```mermaid

> flowchart LR
>   subgraph "HyperShift Management Cluster (MC)"
>     metrics-hsp["<b>HyperShift Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
>     subgraph "HC Namespace: my-cluster-x"
>       ns-c1["<b>Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
>     end
>     subgraph "HC Namespace: my-cluster-y"
>       ns-c2["<b>Package</b><br>metrics-forwarder"]
>     end
>   end
>   metrics-hsp--->ns-c1
>   metrics-hsp--->ns-c2

Reviewer 2: HyperShiftPackage -> HostedClusterPackage
Simplified nomenclature.

```suggestion
flowchart LR
  subgraph "HyperShift Management Cluster"
    metrics-hsp["<b>HostedClusterPackage</b><br>example-package"]
    subgraph "Namespace: my-cluster-x"
      ns-c1["<b>Package</b><br>example-package"]
    end
    subgraph "Namespace: my-cluster-y"
      ns-c2["<b>Package</b><br>example-package"]
    end
  end
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c1
  metrics-hsp--->ns-c2
```

```

### Key Features

* **Progressive Rollout**: Updates are rolled out gradually to `HostedClusters`
  rather than all at once.
* **Lifecycle Automation**: Automatically creates Packages for new
  `HostedClusters` and deletes them when the cluster is removed.
* **Status & Monitoring**: Provides status updates on the number
  of available, unavailable, or updated packages.
* **Simplified Configuration**: Reduces the configuration surface from
  multiple objects to just the `HostedClusterPackage` API.

## HostedClusterPackage Resource

The newly introduced `HostedClusterPackage` resource configuration object
for this functionality. It coordinates the rollout process and which
`HostedClusters` in the fleet are targeted.

### Targeting Clusters

The API includes an optional label selector to target specific HostedClusters
within the Management cluster.

```yaml
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        foo: bar

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The list of `HostedCluster` objects can be limited by specifying an optional
label selector. 

Example selecting `HostedCluster`s with the `foo: bar` label.
```yaml
spec:
  hostedClusterSelector:
    matchLabels:
      foo: bar
  template: {}
```
```

  unknown values are placed in an implicit "unknown" group and upgraded last.
* **Dynamic Regrouping**: If a cluster's label changes to an earlier group
  during an upgrade, the process will jump back to handle that group before
  continuing.

Example for `static` ordering:

```yaml
spec:
  partition:
    labelKey: hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group
    order:
      static:
        - early
        - normal
        - late
```

Example for `alphanumeric` ordering:

```yaml
spec:
  partition:
    labelKey: hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group
    order:
      alphanumericAsc: {}
```

### Progression Strategies

The API supports configurable progression strategies to control the speed
and safety of the rollout.

### Rolling Upgrade

The `rollingUpgrade` strategy is designed to keep service disruptions to a
minimum.

* `maxUnavailable`: Configures the maximum number of Package instances that
  can be updating or unavailable at the same time. If a Package is already
  unavailable before the upgrade starts, it counts towards this limit. These
  unavailable packages are prioritized for updates to prevent accumulating
  faulty versions.

```yaml
spec:
  strategy:
    rollingUpgrade:

>       maxUnavailable: 1

Reviewer 3: Question:
Are the limits set here evaluated against the number of failures by phase of the rollout or complete rollout?

Author: `maxUnavailable` specifies the maximum amount of unavailable packages over all targeted hosted clusters for a rollout procedure. For example, if there exist N targeted clusters, and `maxUnavailable: 1`, then only one package will be upgraded at a time, and if one becomes unavailable, the rollout procedure will stop and wait for the package to eventually recover or a new upgrade to be rolled out instead.

### Let's imagine this with a scenario

#### Hosted Clusters with Packages

1. **hosted-cluster-1**
   - Package A
2. **hosted-cluster-2**
   - Package A
   - Package B
3. **hosted-cluster-3**
   - Package B
   - Package C
4. **hosted-cluster-4**
   - Package A
   - Package C
   - Package D

_Say, there's a new version of **Package A**, which needs to be rolled out._ 

So, our target hosted clusters are **hosted-cluster-1**, **hosted-cluster-2**, and **hosted-cluster-4** respectively. With `maxUnavailable: 1` the rollout will start from **hosted-cluster-1** and will proceed to the next target hosted cluster (can be random or based on some ordering specified) only when rollout of **Package A** in **hosted-cluster-1** was successful.

Example `Status` and `Conditions` for a successful rollout:

```yaml
status:
  availablePackages: 3
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2026-02-05T06:59:51Z"
    message: 3/3 packages available.
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: EnoughPackagesAvailable
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  - lastTransitionTime: "2026-02-05T06:59:57Z"
    message: 3/3 packages progressed.
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: AllPackagesProgressed
    status: "False"
    type: Progressing
  - lastTransitionTime: "2026-02-05T06:57:57Z"
    message: 0/3 packages paused.
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: NoPackagePaused
    status: "False"
    type: HasPausedPackage
  observedGeneration: 2
  progressedPackages: 3
  totalPackages: 3
  updatedPackages: 3
```

## Configuration Example

The following YAML example demonstrates a HostedClusterPackage configured with
risk-based partitioning and a rolling upgrade strategy.

```yaml
apiVersion: package-operator.run/v1alpha1
kind: HostedClusterPackage
metadata:
  name: example-hosted-cluster-package
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        foo: bar
    spec:
      image: some-registry.io/foo-bar/test:v0.0.1

>   # Partition Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  partition:
    labelKey: hypershift.openshift.io/risk-group
    order:
      alphanumericAsc: {}
  strategy:
    rollingUpgrade:

>       maxUnavailable: 1 # Max packages to update concurrently

Reviewer: I suggest moving this block before `.spec.template` to make rollout behavior visible first.
